---
layout: post
title:  "E9:205 Machine Learning for Signal Processing (Fall 2016 [Aug-Dec])"
excerpt: Feature extraction, machine learning and deep learning algorithms for real world signals like speech and image. 
---
<br>
<div class="table-wrapper">
<div markdown = "1">


|Semester  |Aug-Dec         |
|Type      |Elective        |
|Credits   |3:1             |
|Instructor|Sriram Ganapathy|

</div>
</div>

##  Objectives  
The goal of this course is to develop techniques which can enable machines to understand complex real-world signals like text, speech, images, videos etc. This course will cover methods which analyze, classify and detect the underlying information modalities present in real-world signals. This course consists of descriptions of signal processing tools for learning patterns in image and speech signals as the description of a class of machine learning tools which have been successfully used for these signals. There will be an emphasis on the application to image and speech recognition with roughly about 25% of the course driven from this perspective. This will be enforced by a final project submission on one of these applications. 

## Syllabus  
- Introduction to real world signals - text, speech, image, video.  
- Feature extraction and front-end signal processing - information rich representations, robustness to noise and artifacts, signal enhancement, bio inspired feature extraction.  
- Basics of pattern recognition, Generative modeling - Gaussian and mixture Gaussian models, hidden Markov models, factor analysis and latent variable models.  
- Discriminative modeling - support vector machines, neural networks and back propagation.  
- Introduction to deep learning - convolutional and recurrent networks, pre-training and practical considerations in deep learning, understanding deep networks.  
- Clustering methods and decision trees.  
- Decoding time sequences with finite state networks.  
- Feature and model adaptation methods.  
- Feature selection methods.  
- Applications in computer vision and speech recognition. 

## Timing  
MW 4-530pm 

## Location  
EE 303

## Grading Details
<br>
<div class="table-wrapper">
<div markdown = "1">


|Assignments   | 50% |
|Midterm exam. |20% |
|Final exam.   |50% |
|Project       | 20% |

</div>
</div>


## Pre-requisites

- Random Process/Probablity and Statistics
- Linear Algebra/Matrix Theory
- Basic Digital Signal Processing/Signals and Systems

## Textbooks
- “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning”, C.M. Bishop, 2nd Edition, Springer, 2011.
- “Deep Learning”, I. Goodfellow, Y, Bengio, A. Courville, MIT Press, 2016.
- “Digital Image Processing”, R. C. Gonzalez, R. E. Woods, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall, 2008.
- “Fundamentals of speech recognition”, L. Rabiner and H. Juang, Prentice Hall, 1993.

## References
- “Deep Learning : Methods and Applications”, Li Deng, Microsoft Technical Report.
- “Automatic Speech Recognition - Deep learning approach" - D. Yu, L. Deng, Springer, 2014.
- “Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications”, R. Szeliski, Springer, 2010.